I had this amazing teacher in high school, Mr. Beuschlein.  He was my “teacher” for physics and calculus, but was much more or a mentor than a teacher.  In class we never really seemed to have a syllabus.  We would maybe do 20 minutes of work on the 'subject of that day' and then quickly move to tangential subjects and labs for the rest of the time.  We always learned what we “needed" to learn for the class, but more importantly, we saw how everything fit together.  We would talk politics, art, science, literature etc; you name it we discussed it.  I was really quiet back then. I would sit and listen to the others in my class, often in admiration of their passions and the eagerness of my teacher to encourage their passions with conversation.  Everything seemed interconnected.  We might be talking about electromagnetism at the beginning of class, but by the end, we were looking into similar forces in biology or chemistry, deriving relevant formulas, and if we had time, quickly researching relevant applications of the subject before class ended.  I don’t know if our class structure was intentional or if Mr. Beuschlein was easily distracted; regardless, the structure of his class is one that I wish was applied to all my classes during high school.

In retrospect, high school was the time for exploration and discovery in ourselves.  We didn’t know what we wanted to do before high school, and few of us knew what we wanted to do when we graduated.  Mr. Beuschlein’s class facilitated this necessity of self exploration.  

Extending the practice of how I learn (from the previous assignment), I would like to create a curriculum that is based on the idea of conversation/communication as a necessary practice to obtain knowledge.  Critical conversation and critical listening between students, instructors, and subjects will be encouraged to promote exploration into hybrid fields of interdisciplinary  practice as they move into their junior and senior year and (hopefully) college.  In theory, the program will provide the language, tools, and applications necessary for conversation and collaboration. 

The course structure will be based on a 10 class periods centered around daily symposiums with practical labs.  Symposium and lab will count as 2 courses leaving students with 8 classes chosen based on individual capacity and curiosity.  Out of these 8 courses, students will be required to take 4 humanities courses and 4 math/science courses for balance.  In these symposiums and labs would be cross disciplinary discussion and research.  It is not necessary for instructors to have knowledge in all areas of study.  Instructors will stand in as catalysts for conversation and curiosity.  Symposiums and practical labs will take place between 10 students with shared and dissimilar classes.   Their will be no hierarchy between participants.   Students will explore tangential subjects through conversation, and be encouraged to ask all questions they see relevant.

Physical wellness will be explored through after school extracurriculars.

OBJECTIVE:
Prepare students to approach the world with a cross disciplinary, collaborative practice.  Encourage lateral thinking between subjects in order to inform independent, unique ideas. 

PREREQUISITES:
Prerequisites will be based on a course to course basis.  For example, students interested in taking courses in calculus ii, must have previously completed calculus and before that, pre-calculus.  Students interested in taking higher level courses in any respective subject must take the necessary foundation courses for that subject or show a capacity of competent knowledge. 
